in this lecture we are going to have
discussion on superposition theorem we
will see what is superposition theorem
and how to use this theorem to do the
analysis of linear bi-directional
networks and we will start with the
statement of superposition theorem
superposition theorem states that the
voltage across all the current through
an element in a linear circuit is the
algebraic sum it is the algebraic sum of
the voltages across all the currents
through that element due to each
independent source acting alone
this statement will make complete sense
after solving one example now from this
statement we can say that in a linear
bi-directional network containing more
than one independent source the response
in any element is the sum of responses
obtained with one source acting at a
time and the other source is being
turned off now what do we mean by turned
off turned off means all the independent
sources are replaced by their internal
resistances that is we replace every
voltage source by zero volt or we can
say the short-circuit and every current
source by zero ampere or we can say that
open circuit for example here we have
this voltage source and if we want to
turn off this voltage source then we
will simply short-circuit this voltage
source here we have short circuited in
this voltage source and if we have the
current source and we want to turn it
off then we will open circuit this
current source here we have open
circuited this current source so this is
what do we mean by turning of the
independent sources now before we move
on to the example to understand the
superposition theorem in a better way we
will first note down two important
points
according to the first point we do not
turn off the dependent sources the
dependent sources are left as they are
this is important point to remember in
second point we should note down that
the superposition theorem is not valid
in case of non linear circuits so this
is all for the introduction now we will
move on to the implementation and I have
taken one question to understand how we
can use superposition to find the
voltage across an element so here is our
network and we need to find this voltage
V by using the superposition theorem I
will give you few seconds to analyze the
given Network
I hope you are done now we will move on
to the solution when you observe the
given network you will find we have 1 &
2 sources and we have two resistors out
of which we need to find the voltage
across 4 ohm resistor and for this
purpose we will use superposition
theorem and according to the
superposition theorem the voltage across
an element is the algebraic sum of the
voltages due to each independent source
acting alone we have two independent
sources and we need to find out voltage
across this resistor due to each source
one by one and then finally we will add
the obtained voltages to have the net
voltage V this will be more clear once
we start solving the question so what I
will do first is I will consider the
voltage across 4 ohm resistor due to
this source so first I will consider
this 6 volt source and this means we
need to turn off this 3 ampere source
that means we will open circuit the
source so let us copy in the given
Network and after copying it we will do
some modifications and the modification
is we will open circuit this source and
we will write V as V sub 1 because this
is not the voltage V we have turned off
this source and therefore the voltage
obtained here is only due to this source
now it is very easy to find out V 1 if
we can find out the current through this
resistor we can have V 1 and to find out
the current in this loop we will first
assume the current to be i1 and then we
will apply KVL after applying the KVL we
will have plus 6 volts minus i1
multiplied to 8 minus i1 multiplied to 4
equal to 0 so we will have I 1
equal to 6 divided by 8 plus 4 or we can
say that current high 1 is equal to 0.5
amperes now V 1 it is equal to I 1
multiplied to 4 we know Ivan it is 0.5
therefore V 1 is equal to 0.5 multiplied
to 4 and that is 2 volts so in this way
we have obtained V 1 which is voltage
across 4 ohm resistor due to 6 volt
source alone now we will find out the
voltage across 4 ohm resistor due to
this source so this time we will
consider the 3 amperes source and this
means we need to turn off the 6 volt
source so again we will do the
modification in our network and this
time we are going to short-circuit the 6
volt source so I will remove this source
and then we will have a short circuit
plus I will change the name of V we will
call it V sub 2 now again we will focus
on the calculation of voltage across
this resistor but this time we will find
it out due to this source here when this
source is turned off and to find out the
voltage v2 we will first find out the
current in this branch let's say the
current is i2 and once we have I - we
can have v2 to find out I 2 we will use
the current divider rule according to
the current divider rule we will have i2
equal to the total current entering
multiplied to the other resistance which
is 8 ohms divided by the sum of 2
resistances 8 plus 4 so we have I 2
equal to 3 multiplied to 8 divided by 12
so in this way we have obtained I 2
equal to 2 amperes
now we can find out V 2 V 2 is equal to
I 2 which is 2 multiplied to 4 ohms so
finally we are getting V 2 equal to 8
volts so 8 volts is the voltage across 4
ohm resistor because of this 3 ampere
source now the net voltage across this
resistor which is V is equal to V 1 plus
V 2 and this is from superposition
theorem we know V 1 we know V 2 we will
have V equal to 2 plus 8 that is 10
volts so 10 volts is the answer
[Music]
[Applause]
you
[Music]